VIII 

On the Industrial System 


‘God said: love and help one another’ 

PREFACE* 

Du Systeme Industriel; the first part, 311 pages, was published in Paris in February 
1821 ; the second part, 220 pages, appeared later in the same year. But, as usual, 
Saint-Simon published several chapters in separate pamphlets. 

The root cause of the crisis in which the body politic has been 
involved for the last thirty years is the complete change in the 
social system, which is taking place today in the most advanced 
countries as the final outcome of all the successive modifications 
undergone by the old political order up to no\v. More accurately, the crisis consists essentially in the passage from a feudal 
ecclesiastical system to an industrial and scientific one. Inevitably, it will last until the new system is fully operative. 

These fundamental truths have been ignored to date, and 
still arc being ignored by both the governors and the governed; 
or rather they have been and they still are felt only in a vague 
and incomplete way, which is utterly inadequate. The nineteenth century is still dominated by the critical spirit of the 
eighteenth; it still has not adopted the organizational character 
^which really belongs to it. This is the real, primary cause of the 
frightening prolongation of the crisis, and of the terrible storms 
which have accompanied it up to now. But, of necessity, the 
crisis will come to an end, or at least will change into a simple 
moral movement, as soon as we can bring ourselves to fill the 
eminent role assigned to us by the march of civilization, as soon 
as the temporal and spiritual forces which must come into play 
have emerged from their inertia. 

The general aim of the philosophical work, of which I am 
presenting a fragment to the public today, will be to develop 
and prove the important propositions ^which I have just stated 
briefly; it will be to fix the general attention as forcibly as 
possible on the true character of the great social re-organization 
reserved for the nineteenth century; to show that this reorganization, gradually prepared for by all the advances which civilization has made up to the present, has reached its full 
maturity today, and that it cannot be postponed without serious 
setback; to indicate clearly and accurately the way to bring 
this about, calmly, safely and quickly, in spite of die real difficulties; in a \word, to co-operate, as far as lies in the power of 
philosophy, in the moulding of die industrial and scientific 
system, the establishment of which, alone, can bring to an end 
die present social turmoil. 

I boldly put forward die idea that the industrial doctrine 
would spread without difficulty and would be accepted without 
much effort, if the majority of people were in a position to grasp 
it and to judge it. Unfortunately, this is not so. Bad and deeply 
ingrained attitudes of mind prevent most people from grasping 
how intelligent this doctrine is,‘ Bacon’s tabula rasa is infinitely 
more necessary for political ideas than for any others and, for 
this reason if for no other, it must encounter many more 
difficulties as regards this area of ideas. 

The problem faced by the scientists when they tried to instill 
the true meaning of astronomy and chemistry into minds which 
until then had been accustomed to look at these sciences in the 
manner of astrologers and alchemists, can be seen today in 
relation to politics, in which a similar kind of change must he 
made, i.e. the transition from the conjectural to the positive, 
from the metaphysical to the physical. 

Forced to combat obstinate and widely held attitudes, I think 
that it will be useful to by-pass these and to anticipate a small 
part of my work, by explaining here in a general, brief way, the 
influence which vague and metaphysical doctrines have had 
and still retain on politics, the mistaken way in which they were 
taken for true politics, and lastly the necessity of abandoning 
them today. 

The industrial and scientific system arose and developed 
under the domination of the feudal and ecclesiastical system. 
Now, this simple comparison is enough to show that between 
two systems so utterly opposed, there must have existed a kind 
of vague, intermediary system, uniquely destined to modify the 
old system in such a way that the new system could develop and, 
later, bring about the transition. This is the universal historical 
fact most easily predicted from the data I have put forward. 
Any change, temporal or spiritual, can only take place gradually. Here, the change was so great and, on the other hand, 



the feudal and ecclesiastical system was so totally opposed by 
its very nature to any modifications that, for these modifications to take place, it was necessary for special action to be 
carried on for several centuries by particular classes derived 
from, but also distinct from, the ancien rigime and independent 
of it up to a point, and which, in consequence, must have 
constituted, by the sole fact of their political existence, what I 
call by abstraction an intermediary and transitional system in 
the heart of society. These classes were, in the temporal sphere, 
the jurists, and in the spiritual one, the metaphysicians, who 
arc closely linked in their political action, like feudalism and 
theology, or industry and the observational sciences. 

This universal truth is of the highest importance. It is one of 
the fundamental facts which should serve as a basis for the positive theory of politics. This is what it is most important to stress 
today because the vagueness and obscurity which have surrounded it up to now are what most complicate political ideas 
today and cause nearly all the digressions. 

It would be completely unphilosophical not to recognize the 
useful and distinguished influence exercised by the jurists and 
metaphysicians in modifying die feudal and ecclesiastical system, and in preventing it from stifling the industrial and 
scientific system in its earliest stages. The abolition of the feudal 
courts, the establishment of a less oppressive and fairer system 
of justice were the efforts of the jurists. How often in France the 
action of the parliaments has served to safeguard industry 
against feudalism ] To blame these bodies for their ambition 
IS to blame die inevitable results of a cause which is useful, 
reasonable and necessary. It is to beg the question. As for the 
metaphysicians, it is to them that we owe the Reformation of 
the sixteenth century and the establishment of the principle of 
freedom of conscience, which undermined ecclesiastical power. 

I should overstep the bounds of a preface, were I to insist 
further upon remarks which every unbiased mind can easily 
develop from the preceding points. As for myself, I declare that 
I cannot see how the old system could have been modified and 
the new developed, without the intervention of the jurists and 
metaphysicians 

On the other hand, if it is foolish to deny the particular usefulness of the part played by the jurists and metaphysicians in 
the advance of civilization, it is very dangerous to exaggerate 
this usefulness or to misconstrue its true nature. By the very fact 
of the end it had in view, the political influence of the jurists and 
metaphysicians was limited to an ephemeral existence, because 
it was of necessity modificatory and transitional and not in any 
way organizational. It had fulfilled its whole natural function at 
the moment when the old system had lost the greater part of its 
power, and the forces of the new had become really powerful in 
society, both temporally and spiritually. Up to that point, which 
was reached in the middle of the last century, the political 
career of the jurists and metaphysicians was still honourable and 
useful, whereas it has now in fact become positively harmful 
because it has outlived its natural limit. 

When the French Revolution broke out, there was no longer 
any question of modifying the feudal and ecclesiastical system, 
which had already lost nearly all its real strength. It was a question of organizing the industrial and scientific system, which 
was called for in that phase of civilization to replace it. Consequently, the industrialists and scientists were the ones who 
should have taken the political stage, each in their natural 
roles. Instead, the jurists put themselves at the head of the 
Revolution and conducted it according to the doctrines of the 
metaphysicians. It is superfluous to recall the strange twists and 
turns which followed and the evils which resulted from these 
digressions. But it must be carefully noted that, in spite of this 
terrible experience, the jurists and metaphysicians have remained consistently at the head of affairs and it is they alone 
who today direct all political discussions. 

This experience, however costly it may have been and however decisive it really was, will not bear fruit because of its 
complexity, until a direct analysis has proved the absolute 
necessity of removing the universal political influence which is 
granted to the jurists and the metaphysicians which stems only 
from tire assumption that their doctrines are pre-eminent. But 
it is very easy to prove that the doctrines of tire jurists and metaphysicians are, today, by their very nature, quite unfitted to 
guide the political action of either the governors or Ae governed 
properly. This obstacle is so great that it outweighs the advantages which might be presented by individual abilities, no 
matter how brilliant they  are. 

Today, more enlightened minds recognize clearly the 
necessity for a complete recasting of the social system; this need has become so immediately pressing that it must be met. But the 
biggest mistake which is generally made in this respect is to 
believe that the new system should be built upon the doctrines 
of the jurists and metaphysicians. This mistake only persists 
because we do not climb high enough in the scale of political 
observations, because general theories are not examined carefully enough, or because political thinking is not yet based upon 
historical facts. Were this not so, the mistake would not be made 
of taking a modification of the social system — a modification 
which has exhausted its effect and which has no further part to 
play — for a genuine change in the system itself. 

The jurists and metaphysicians arc prone to take the form for 
the substance and words for things. Leading from that comes 
the generally accepted idea of political systems of almost infinite 
multiplicity. But, in fact, there are and can only be two really 
distinct systems of social organization, the feudal or military 
system and the industrial system; and in the spiritual realm, a 
system of beliefs and a system of positive demonstrations. The 
entire history of civilized mankind is inevitably divided between these two great systems of society. For a nation, as for an 
individual, there are in effect only two ends, conquest or work, 
to which correspond spiritually either blind faith or scientific 
demonstration, that is to say, demonstrations founded upon 
positive observations. Now, the end of universal activity must be 
changed, if the social system is genuinely to be changed. All 
other improvements, no matter how important they may be, 
are only modifications, that is to say, changes in the form and 
not in the system. Only metaphysics can make this seem otherwise, through its unfortunate talent for confounding what should 
be separate and separating what should be confounded. 

Society was organized in a precise and characteristic manner 
so long as the feudal or military system was flourishing, because 
It then had a clear, predetermined objective, which was to wage 
war, an end to which all parts of the body politic were coordinated. Today, too, it tends to organize itself in a more 
perfect manner, a manner no less precise and characteristic, but 
directed towards an industrial objective, towards which all 
social forces will converge. But from the decline of the feudal or 
military system until the present, society has not really been 
organized because the two goals having been pursued simultaneously, the political order of necessity has showed nothing 
but a mixed character. Now what was useful and even necessary 
m a transitional and preparatory' state of affairs, clearly becomes absurd as a permanent system today, when the transition has really taken place in all major respects. It is to this state, 
nevertheless, that the doctrines of the jurists and metaphysicians 
lead. 

It cannot be too often repeated that a society needs an active 
goal, for without this there would be no political system.' Now 
to legislate is not an end in itself; it can only be a means. 
Would it not be odd if, as a result of all the progress of civilization, mankind today had succeeded in associating in societies 
merely to pass laws for each other This would surely be the purest humbug. Would this not mean that men met solemnly in 
order to draw up new rules for the pawns, imagining them to be 
the players? Such an obvious absurdity is nevertheless natural 
and, as such, excusable among jurists whose judgement is 
usually vitiated by the habit of only looking at the forms. But 
among the industrialists accustomed, on the contrary, to consider only fundamentals, the prolongation of such an error is 
utterly inexcusable. . . . 

1. Bonaparte realized this fundamental truth, when he undertook to reform the feudal and ecclesiastical system. Only he applied it wrongly. This was due as much to his lack of ability as to his ambition, since his education should have made it possible for him to know how a leader of a civilized nation should direct its activity. In our age, an ambitious man, if he realizes that he lacks ability, becomes a soldier, and if he is able, an industrialist. 

2. One would say, without doubt, that the purpose of the social contract in this case would be to guarantee the maintenance of freedom. This is merely to turn the same idea round and to mistake a transitional order of things for the system which is to be set up. 
The maintenance of freedom had to be the first object of concern, so long as the feudal and ecclesiastical system still retained some power, because at that time freedom was exposed to heaty and continuous attack. But today there is no need for the same anxiety about the establishment of the industrial and scientific system, since this system must inevitably bring with it, without any direct help, the highest degree of social, temporal and spiritual freedom. In such an order of things, a great apparatus of political groupings, solely designed to preserve freedom from 
an attack to which it must no longer be seriously exposed, would be like Don 
Quixote’s tilting at windmills 

Besides, the maintenance of individual freedom cannot be the goal of the social 
contract. Freedom, considered from the true point of view, is an outcome of 
civilization, progressive as it is, but it cannot be the object. People do not band 
together to be free. Savages join together to hunt, to wage war, but certainly not to 
win liberty, because from this point of view they would do better if they remained 
isolated. An active goal, I repeat, is necessary and freedom cannot be the goal 
because it presupposes it. For real freedom docs not consist in staying with folded 
arms within an association; such an attitude should be severely reprimanded, 
wherever it exists; on the contrary, it consists in developing, unfettered and in the 
widest possible way, a temporal or spiritual capacity, useful for association. 

Let us observe further that, successively, as civilization advances, the division of 
work, taken spiritually and temporally and from the most general point of view, increases in the same proportion. The inevitable result is that men depend less on each 
other individually, but that each man depends more on the mass, in exactly the same 
way. Now, the vague and metaphysical idea of freedom, as it is held today (if one 
continues to take it as the basis of political doctrine) will tend to hinder the action 
of the mass on individuals. From this point of view, it would act against the 
development of civilization and the organization of a well-regulated system, which 
demands that the parts should be firmly linked to the whole and dependent on it. 

I am not speaking of political freedom, because it is only too clear that even less than individual freedom can it be seen as an end of association. Besides, I can state on this subject, as a pointer to the true state of affairs, that the right to take part in 
public affairs, without any requirement of competence, in theory, confers a kind of natural  right on every citizen and restrains only in practice, but always without the requirement of competence, is by itself the most complete and obvious proof of 
the vagueness and uncertainty in which political ideas are still plunged. Would 
anyone ever have thought, without this, of declaring, indirectly it is true, but in no 
uncertain terms, that to reason about politics does not require natural or acquired 
ability? 

Why is it not proclaimed that Frenchmen who pay thousands of francs in direct 
taxation are fit to make discoveries in chemistry, when exactly the same principle 
has been established for politics which is, after all, just as difficult and as important 
as chemistry? Why? Because the requirements of the competence necessary to engage in chemistry are clear and those relating to politics are not. And in what does this difference lie? In that today chemistry is a positive science, while politics is still only a body of conjectural doctrine which has not earned the name of science. 

It is a characteristic of metaphysics, precisely because it teaches nothing real, to persuade a man that he is fit for anything without any need of special study. The remarkable circumstance which I have just pointed out, only exists today for politics and philosophy, the mother of politics, because they alone, among all the branches of our knowledge, have remained metaphysical. But the same thing can be observed about those sciences which arc the most positive today, for the period when they were still plunged in the shadowy realm of metaphysics. The requirements of the competence necessary to win the right to cultivate the sciences only became clear and precise and ceased to be the universal subject for debate when those sciences took on a positive character. It should he absolutely the same for politics. One can maintain today without exposing oneself to ridicule that political science is innate and that one only needs to have been born French to be able to reason: such language is even thought to be patriotic. But when politics has 
climbed up to the level of the observed sciences, a time which cannot be far off, the requirements of competence will become clear and fixed and the cultivation of politics trill be exclusively entrusted to a special class of scientists who will put an end to the ill-informed gossip.

ON THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM (l)* 

Because no efforts are being made to re-establish the influence 
of the concept of King by the grace of God, people may fear that it 
will be replaced by the idea of the sovereignty of the people. 
This is a natural fear, but completely unreal. A moment’s 
reflection will show this to be true. 

Legitimacy, as it is understood, has not existed as a systematic 
and valid doctrine since the Reformation. In order to preserve a 
political existence which had been deeply shaken, the clergy 
agreed to become subordinate to the monarchy, and put forward this piece of dogma to ensure the good will of tire monarchy 
for themselves. Before then, there had indeed been talk of by the 
grace of God] but it did not have this lofty religious character nor 
the importance which it later gained when the kings employed 
it indiscriminately together with by the strength of my sword. Now 
it is remarkable that the famous dogma of the sovereignty of the 
people, if it was not invented, at least began to gain credit in 
Holland at about the same time. If one looks at the progress of 
these two dogmas, one sees that they march continually abreast. 
Such a constant relationship points to a far closer connection 
between them than is commonly supposed. And, in fact, it is not 
difficult to see that they are closely bound together or, rather, 
that the one created the other by their opposing juxtaposition. 

No matter how superficially one may reflect on this, one will 
see that these two dogmas only exist in opposition to each other. 
The popular meaning of the expression sovereignty of the people, in 
fact the only clear meaning which can be given to it, is sovereignty by the will of the people, since the people know very well 
that, except for a few moments of very brief delirium, the people 
have no time to be sovereign. Now, as it is agreed that this will 
is not decided by fixed conditions, derived from the interests of 
the people and that it is completely independent of the worth 
of the sovereign, it follows that the expression sovereignty by the 
will of the people is only significant when it is opposed by 
sovereignty by the grace of God. It merely signifies a simple 
formality which must be fulfilled towards the people or their 
representatives, beyond which there is nothing else, i.e. consent 
is no longer demanded ; so, everything depends on this demand, 
and consequently the demand can only be seen as a criticism of 
the idea of by the grace of God, which really means only the independent consent of the people. These two opposing dogmas thus 
have nothing but a reciprocal existence. They are the last traces 
of the long metaphysical war against the political principles of 
feudalism which took place throughout western Europe after 
the Reformation. In time of war, one is forced to use the same 
weapons as one’s enemy. An abstraction, therefore, gave rise to 
another abstraction. The metaphysics of tire clergy were staked 
against the metaphysics of the jurists, who were destined to 
fight against them. But now this battle is over.


ON THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM (2)* 

. . . You are continually told about the interests of the revolution’, 
it is a much used and conventional expression; everywhere, and 
on every occasion, it is loudly proclaimed that the object of the 
so-called liberal cause, which you take as the industrial cause, is 
to ensure the triumph of the interest of the revolution, and it is 
cleverly insinuated that the Bourbons arc an insurmountable 
obstacle to this triumph. Allow me to say, Gentlemen, that 
I think this is really humbug: I would use a weightier expression, if I could think of a more accurate one. 

What a strange power words have to confuse ideas! You 
arc, gentlemen, and rightly so, profoundly and deeply attached 
to the revolution, in the sense that you firmly and ardently desire 
the genuine change of system which was its true objective from 
the beginning, and at the same time, you feel vaguely that this 
end has not been achieved, without being able to point directly 
to what is required to achieve it. The party which has usurped 
your trust will teach you what is lacking! Thanks to this vagueness and uncertainty, by the clever use of a phrase, it has succeeded in making you believe that the interests of all those who 
have enriched themselves at your expense since 1789, and who 
have so firmly promoted your affairs, are one with those of the 
industrial cause for which the revolution was fought. In this way 
the party succeeded in making you desire, as the triumph of 
the cause, the success of the ambitious plans of the pupils of 
Robespierre and Bonaparte; no sooner did the latter possess 
power, than they found nothing more urgent to do than to 
oppose the establishment of the industrial system with all their 
might. This is, nevertheless, the true state of affairs, clear to 
anyone who has not been hypnotized. 

It is no longer to the past, gentlemen, that you should look, 
but to the future. You should only remember the past in order 
to profit from the experiences which you bought so dearly. The 
only thing which should concern you is the success of the 
industrial cause, the real and true object of the revolution 
which was vaguely heralded at the beginning, but for which 
there has never been less done than in this period. 

As for the political interests which were created in this period 
you need only defend those attached to the division of property 
and put into practice by the sale of privileged goods, although 
you should regret, in principle, that this division was not 
earned out peaceably, in the industrial manner, instead of 


being torn up violently in the feudal way. But these interests are 
unassailable and you cannot seriously fear that they will be 
attacked in a way which will cause you any anxiety. With this 
single exception, you have nothing whatsoever in common with 
what are called the interests of the revolution-, on the contrary, they 
are all strongly opposed to your own and your most ardent wish 
should be that their ambition should be curbed. 


LETTER TO THE INDUSTRIALISTS* 

Gentlemen, 

In the previous letters, I have only discussed from a national 
point of view the opinion on a change of dynasty. In order to 
complete the examination, it remains for me to present it to you 
from a higher point of view, that of Europe. 

Gentlemen, the great movement of civilization in which the 
French people have been involved since 1789 should not be seen 
as purely national. It has a more universal character. All the 
peoples of western Europe arc taking part in it in a manner 
more or less easy to discern. The three recent examples of Spain, 
Naples and Portugal have just given the clearest proof of this. 
You must view your cause in this important respect in order to 
get a complete idea of your true political situation. Let us 
develop this theme further. 

Since the universal establishment of the Roman domination 
in western Europe, there has always existed among the different 
nations which compose it a sort of homogeneous political link 
which, in spite of very real national differences, stamps them 
with a communal character and, in this respect, separates them 
completely from the states of eastern Europe. Their civilization 
developed in an almost uniform way, at least in all the most 
essential respects, although it did not advance everywhere with 
the same speed. This similarity has become progressively more 
complete as the growth of enlightenment has facilitated and
multiplied communications of every kind. 

Hitherto, this analogy has appeared merely to be an inevitable 
result of the nature of things, which the peoples have obeyed 
involuntarily, without being aware of it. The formation of 
modern societies in the Middle Ages took place among the 
various nations, in the same way and at about the same time, 


when great political conformity already existed among them, by 
virtue of a common domination. 

It was inevitable that their later advance should feel the 
effects of this communal origin, up to a point, and that, 
in effect, without any design, a certain similarity should be 
established, and their progress should be almost simultaneousness. But today, instead of this simple analogy, there can and 
there even ought to be a true combination of political effort 
established among these peoples, with the object of establishing 
the industrial regime, which has always been their final common destination and which today should be the goal of all, even 
though they are not all equally close to it. The possibility, or 
better, the necessity, of such a combination is one of the most 
important and fortunate results of the progress of enlightenment.

Thus, Gentlemen, the cause which you ought to espouse is 
not simply French, it is European. In the action which you are 
called upon to take in France, you should see yourselves as 
collaborating which all the industrialists of western Europe. To 
your national duties arc thus added, Gentlemen, duties of a 
more universal nature; European duties, based, like the others, 
upon your interests, upon the role which the progress of civilization has assigned to you today in order to establish the industrial regime. It is easy to determine your obligations in this 
respect: they are part of the general need to attune yourselves 
politically to the other peoples of western Europe; that is to 
adopt at once the improvements which they have adopted and, 
in your turn, to set an example in the part of the common work 
which has been allotted to you. 




First Address 


TO THE KING* 


‘God said: love and help one another’ 

Sire, every association of men which has a well-defined character, from the simplest to the most complex, must be either 
military or industrial, because true association cannot exist 
without a common purpose, and there are only two such purposes possible for any collection of men, just as there are for 
a single individual: they arc either conquest or work. Any 
nation which is not clearly organized for one or other of these 
two purposes is not a true political association; it is only an 
agglomeration of individuals of a very doubtful character. 

There are, therefore, only two possible true constitutions, 
each answering to a different purpose, the military constitution 
and the industrial one. The choice between them is decided by 
the state of civilization of each people and of its neighbours
The Charter, which is neither a military nor an industrial 
constitution, because it is trying to be both at once, is therefore 
not a real constitution. 

Reason shows and the facts confirm that the military constitution belonged to the early history of mankind. It necessarily 
corresponded to that state of ignorance of the laws of nature 
which resulted in a failure to act upon nature in order to adapt 
it to man’s advantage. But as these laws were revealed and as 
this activity developed, so society^ gradually advanced under the 
shadow of the military constitution, in the direction _ of the 
industrial constitution, the true and final destination of civilized 
mankind. 

The moment when the industrial constitution is ripe can perhaps be determined with some accuracy by this  twofold basic 
condition. When the overwhelming majority of the nation, as 
individuals are joined in greater or lesser industrial associations 
and bound, two by two, Siree by'^ three, etc., by industrial links 
which will enable a general system to be formed, directing them 
towards a great common industrial purpose, in which they will
all be co-ordinated according to their respective functions; 2. 
when the observation of the laws of nature are fully active 
taking into account all the various natural phenomena; which 
will enable all the separate sciences to be unified in a universal 
system of the study of nature, corresponding to the universal 


system by which nature acts. When a society has reached this 
point and is not surrounded by purely military nations, it can 
be said that it is approaching the industrial constitution. 

This is the universal advance of mankind, reduced to its 
simplest expression, and taking into account only the main facts 
from among those which result from the very nature of things, 
from which, as Montesquieu so wisely said, in the last analysis, 
the laws of politics, just as much as the scientific laws, must 
derive. 

Sire, when one compares with this model — the general outlines of which I have just sketched — the positive advance of 
society in France up to the present day, it can be seen that, since 
the enfranchisement of the communes and the introduction of 
tire cultivation of the sciences of observation in Europe by the 
Arabs, France has made continual and ever-increasing progress 
towards the industrial system and, correspondingly, the military system has fallen into disarray. In fact, France has now 
reached tire stage of being able to adopt the industrial constitution: for the basic preconditions set forth above have now been 
completely satisfied. 

_ For, firstly, out of thirty million Frenchmen there are twenty nine and a half million industrialists, making up between them 
various associations which arc spread widely enough and 
adequately combined between them; secondly, the observation 
of nature is being carried out in all branches of science; 
astronomy, physics, chemistry and physiology, the latter being 
in our time at the summit of the scientific edifice. Lastly, 
although France’s neighbours may not all have satisfied these 
two major conditions to the same extent as she has done, they 
arc all nevertheless clearly working in the same direction; they 
arc all at the same stage of civilization. 

Sire, as a result of the considerations already mentioned, the 
only constitution possible in France today is the industrial one. 
The Charter, which is clearly not the industrial constitution, 
cannot therefore pass for a true constitution; or if one insists on 
giving it this title, it is a constitution which cannot acquire any 
solidity, since it is not the constitution which the state of 
civilization today demands of us. 

Sire, a real constitution can never be invented; it can only be 
recognized. The true constituent power cannot be either a king 
or an assembly; it is philosophy which studies the advance of 



civilization and which sums up all its observations in a universal 
law, from which die constitutional principle derives and which 
has been verified by die mass of enlightened men. In short, the 
search for the foundations of a constitution is, by its nature, a 
function of spiritual power, which cannot be carried out by die 
temporal power in any way. 

It can be shown through history that things have always 
worked out in this  way until the present time, although it has 
always been a question merely of more or less profound changes 
in the original order of things. How much more pressing it is 
that it should be so today, when a genuinely new constitution is 
in question. 

It is, therefore, not surprising that the so-called constitutions drawn up by the legislative assemblies of France and the imitation of an assembly in Spain should have constituted nothing. 
Similarly, it is very natural that the Charter cannot constitute anything either — even though it was conceived in a far more 
experimental and, consequently, far wiser spirit. If things were 
otherwise it would be surprising, and rightly so, for this  would 
be absolutely contrary to die nature of things. 

What is the Charter then if it is not a true and definitive 
constitution? It is important to be precise about this now. 

The Charter should be seen as a felicitous modification of 
die old political system, which established a provisional and 
preparatory order of things, under the shelter of which society 
can peaceably carry out its transformation into the industrial 
and scientific system. 

When the royal power and the nation both realize that the 
establishment of this system is the only possible end of the 
revolution, without doubt the greatest difficulty will have been 
overcome, for the state of crisis will cease at that moment. But 
the organization of the system will take time, for such an undertaking is slow by its very nature, and because of the theoretical 
work it demands and die changes which it requires in the 
daily habits of nearly all classes — diose who must rise and those who must fall. This is why it is absolutely necessary that the 
Charter, which allows work towards the formation of the new 
system to be undertaken with confidence, should be brought 
into operation gradually, following the natural course of events 
and, as a result, should profit little by little from the advantages 
which this system will engender, even before it has been 
completely constituted. 

Such advantages are undoubtedly precious enough to earn 
the affection and gratitude of the French nation for the Charter 
and its august founder. These two sentiments would not lose any 
of their strength, by being based on a real and positive appraisal 
of the Charter. On the contrary, the more it is seen in its true 
colours, the more it will appear to be appropriate to the present 
time, which is truly a period of transition. The surest way of 
jettisoning these favourable interpretations lies precisely in regarding the Charter as a definitive constitution; for, in spite of 
the fact that the nation can only perceive very vaguely the true 
nature of the system towards which the progress of civilization 
is now leading it, it does nevertheless feel, in a very real, if 
obscure way, that the order established by the Charter in no 
way satisfies its fundamental desires. 

The opinion which I have just set forward being of some importance, since it covers the great political question in general 
terms, must be strengthened by what I believe to be its most 
distinctive considerations. 

I shall have the honour to indicate some of them briefly to 
Your Majesty. . . . 

Sire, the first article of a constitution, the most important of 
all, is clearly the one which enunciates the goal towards which 
this  contract proposes to direct society. If this goal is not fully 
developed, all the other articles, which are only legitimate in 
as far as they relate to the first, inevitably remain in limbo, and 
from that moment onwards the text loses its constitutional 
character. Has a notary ever forgotten to indicate the purpose 
of the association when drawing up a contract for a society? 

Nevertheless, this is the great gap in the Charter. Nowhere is 
tire purpose of the association even hinted at. It begins, as do all 
the constitutions dreamed up since 1789, by putting forward the 
rights of Frenchmen, which can only be clearly determined 
when the purpose of society is established in a positive way, 
since the rights of every associate can only be based upon the 
abilities which he possesses and which contribute towards the 
common goal — this is the case in all private associations. It is 
really strange that something which is universally regarded as 




absolutely necessary for associations of even thirty or a hundred 
individuals, should be missed by everybody when the number of 
the individuals is raised to some thirty million. All this first part 
of the Charter, which is tire most important since it lays down 
the principles, is an all too faithful reflection both of the void in 
which political ideas still languish and of the unfortunate hold 
which metaphysics still has over men’s minds. 

We also sec from this remarkable lack of definition in the 
Charter, which results in a failure to indicate, explicitly or implicitly, the purpose of society and government action, that the 
text can be used to direct society in the most contrary directions. 
For instance, it can be used to re-establish the feudal and ecclesiastical system in all its purity: it is enough merely to substitute 
for the word Chamber the word State . ... In the second place, the 
Charter can be put into effect in a manner which paves the way 
for the coming of tire industrial and scientific system ; for nothing 
in its text formally contradicts this move: this , of course, should 
be its true destination, as I believe I have proved; this would be 
the only sound way to breathe life into it, the only one which 
accords with the interests of the House of Bourbon and of the 
French nation. But, nevertheless, it should be recognized that it 
is an odd constitution which can, at will, be seen cither to be-re-establishing the ancien regime or paving the way for the 
industrial system. The very fact that such flexibility is possible 
is enough to prove that tire Charter is not a true constitution. 

Sire, there is another way to convince oneself directly, and 
without reference to the above considerations that the Charter 
cannot be seen as a definitive and durable constitution; this is 
that the Charter, as a whole and in its most essential clauses is 
clearly simply the English constitution which was established in 
1688. In this respect, it can be judged by experience. 

I shall begin by observing that, in England as in France, and 
in general throughout western Europe, the parliamentary system cannot be the definitive one and can only serve as a transitional stage on the way to the setting up of the industrial 
system, which society is called upon to establish today. The 
reasons upon which I have based this opinion for the case of 
France are, in fact, applicable to all the nations which have 
reached the same stage of civilization, and principally to 
England. 

England, for different reasons, which nearly all stem in the 
last analysis from the isolation of her geographical position, was 
able to arrive at this modification of the feudal and ecclesiastical 
system which is called the parliamentary regime, sooner than 




France, although the degree of civilization which prevailed then 
in England was inferior to that which prevails in France today. 
The result was that this  regime was able to last so long in 
England that it came to be taken for a definitive regime. But 
this circumstance changes nothing of the essential nature of the 
parliamentary régime, which is to be intermediary and transitional. The only result for England will be that the transition 
will as it should take longer than in France, as it began at a 
lower stage of civilization, at an epoch when the continuous 
tendency of civilized man towards the industrial constitution 
was not yet strongly enough pronounced. 

For the rest, this conclusion is directly confirmed by observation; for today all those who have thought deeply about the 
political and civil state of England, considered in its most 
essential aspects and especially with reference to the distribution 
of property, are generally convinced that the English constitution is nearing the end of its existence. It would be odd if 
attempts were made to consolidate the English constitution in 
France, just when it is clearly about to collapse in England 
itself. 

It now remains for me to show that the reasons for the maintenance of die parliamentary regime in England do not exist in 
France and that, consequently, this regime cannot even pretend 
to that minor permanence which it was able to attain among our 
neighbours, and which is still very inferior to that of a truly 
definitive system. 

It cannot be too often repeated, for it is the principle underlying all healthy politics, that a constitution is only durable so 
long as it is, in its essential elements, the expression of the state 
of society at the time at which it was established. A political 
force is not created; either it is numbered among the leading 
powers of society when it has reached a certain stage of civil 
development, or it simply appears; that is all. This recognition 
or, if you wish, this legitimization of the most powerful forces 
which exist in a society at every important stage of civilization 
is what is called its constitution and, without this, it would be 
merely a metaphysical dream. 

In the nature of things the English constitution was drawn up 
according to this principle, and this is why it could endure as 
long as the state of civilization to which it corresponded was not 
essentially changed. But it is for the same reason that the 
Charter could not acquire true stability, other than as a provisional constitution, because it treated as real political forces 
elements which were not rooted in social reality. This is easily 




seen when one considers the political elements which, together 
with the royal power and the communes, combine to form the 
English constitution. I shall confine myself here to pointing to 
two of the most important elements of this observation. 

Sire, the preponderance of the Anglican Church over the 
other religious communions and its existence in the form of a 
corporation of which the head is the king is, without doubt, one 
of the main supports of the English constitution. This is not the 
place to explain how Henry VIII, seizing on Luther’s reform at 
the very beginning and before it had come to maturity, succeeded in delaying at least, if he could not prevent, the overthrow of the old spiritual power by means of a device which 
would have been impracticable a little later on. It is sufficient 
to remark on the fact here and to recognize the importance it 
had for the stability of the English constitution. But does any 
similar prop exist in France? 

The Charter laid down in principle that Catholicism is the 
State religion. This must be true in practice if it is to have any 
political validity; but this is clearly not so. There is no State 
religion in a country in which theological ideas have been subjected to criticism for a long time and have lost almost all their 
influence. Therefore, before attempting to make the old spiritual 
power a prop, it was necessary to have reconstituted it; but 
this, in an enlightened state, is an absurd and fanciful undertaking. Bonaparte intended to make himself pope in France, in 
imitation of Henry VIII, and thought thereby to strengthen his 
power greatly. This was clearly to set about the task the wrong 
way round and to start at the end, even to suppose that it was 
possible to restore to the power of the church its old supremacy. 

Originally, the power of the clergy was based fundamentally 
upon the great superiority of its knowledge over that of the 
other classes; once that superiority disappeared— |Which happened, in fact, a long time ago — the foundations of the 
ecclesiastical power were undermined; for it is in the very 
nature of things that spiritual power should belong to the most 
enlightened class. The only spiritual power which can establish 
itself today is that of the scientists, who correspond to the industrial constitution and whose fundamental authority has 
been unshakeably established by the constant progress made 
in the observed sciences since the Arabs introduced them into 
Europe. 

If, then, it is true that there is no real spiritual power in the 
regime established by the Charter and if it is clear that no true 
constitution can exist without spiritual power, how can it be 



thought that the Charter can. be a true constitution? How can 
it even be hoped that it can have the stability of the English 
constitution, when it lacks one of the fundamental elements of 
the constitution ? 

Then, Sire, the House of Lords is still one of the main powers 
which help to maintain the English constitution. But the House 
of Lords is only a true force in the state because it is a force, and 
a very great one at that, in society. There are many reasons for 
this, above all, the concentration of the greatest estates in the 
hands of members of that House, estates which have been kept 
in the same families by the laws of feudalism which prevent 
them from being broken up. This intermediary power would 
clearly never have been a really effective aid to royalty, had it 
not possessed separate and independent power. It is not by 
virtue of any pre-established theory of political equilibrium 
that the House of Lords is counted among the essential elements 
of the English constitution; it is simply a matter of fact and the 
theories were only dreamed up after the event. The House of 
Lords quite naturally became a part of the English constitution 
because the class of the peers, at the time when the constitution 
^vas set up, was one of the most powerful civil forces in England, 
and could not therefore be refused admission to the number of 
political powers. 

If the Charter is judged by these principles, which are only 
an expression of the facts, one recognizes from this aspect, as 
from the one which I have just considered, that it lacks any real 
foundations. What is a house of peers in a country in which 
feudalism no longer exists and in which land has long been 
divided among a small number of families? What kind of peers 
are they whose existence is only founded upon pensions or upon 
the positions which the royal power gives them ? Theirs is only 
a sham force, which is taken for a genuine force. Neither the 
English peerage nor any of the elements capable of creating it 
exist in France. Our House of Peers can only pass for an extension of the council of state and augments the royal power no 
more than that institution docs, in fact it produces rather a contrary effect since royalty, instead of receiving, is obliged to give. 
Also, the House of Peers plays only an absolutely insignificant, 
and almost ridiculous role; it has and can have no political importance.* Its existence scarcely makes itself felt. All the debates 
take place solely between the crown and the communes because 
in France today the only true forces are, in fact, the crown and 
the communes. Whether to keep or to suppress the House of 




Peers is a matter of indifference from the political point of view 
and is only of limited interest from the financial one, because of 
the sum of five or six million francs which the nation is obliged 
to pay every year to support these hypothetical lords. 

In order to complete this examination and at the same time 
to sum it up, let us suppose that any Englishman active in public 
life and particularly one of the members of the Cabinet is asked 
what would become of the English constitution if the following 
changes were made: 

Take from the King the office of head of the Anglican Church 
and destroy the supremacy of that church; 

Take from the two Houses the King’s Bench, and no longer 
admit judges to it simply by virtue of their office, abolish feudal 
customs throughout England, abrogate all the old civil laws and 
draw up new codes for all the branches of the judiciary; 

Remove from the old peerages the territorial fortunes which 
they have enjoyed since before the English Revolution; 

Suppress the rotten boroughs and share out representation fairly 
in the House of Commons; 

There is not a single Englishman active in public life who 
would not formally declare that such subtractions would remove 
all its strength and solidity from the English constitution. 

How then can one imagine that the Charter, which is simply 
the English constitution without any of these supports could 
acquire solidity and become a lasting constitution? ^ 

Sire, according to the various considerations which I have 
had the honour to submit to Your Majesty in this article, it 
seems to me proven that the Charter can in no way be seen ^ 
a durable and definitive constitution. The order of things which 
it establishes should only be seen as a provisional order, its 
object being to facilitate the transition of society towards the 
industrial constitution, which is the only one which can 
establish itself today. 

Tills view of the Charter, far from alarming Your Majesty is, 
on the contrary, the only one which could lead the people in 
a healthy and conciliatory direction, for die people feel instinctively that the Charter is not that new political system, which 
they feel that they need so much even without clearly understanding its nature. They are carried along by this ignorance to 
look for even greater modifications of the old political system 
which can only really be found in the organization of the 
industrial and scientific system. Their minds are thus hostile to 
a greater or less degree, towards the Charter. If, on the other 




hand, the opinion which interprets the Charter as a necessary 
means of transition towards the industrial constitution were to 
become dominant, the people would immediately feel that if the 
Charter did not fulfil the conditions they demand in the definitive regime, the object of their desires, it conforms in every way 
with all they could ask of a provisional order of things, destined 
to pave the way for this regime. 

[Sire, you also said ;] ‘We should not ask of nascent institutions 
what can only be attained by their complete development and 
the habits which they are destined to form. 

‘Until this has come about, let us know how to recognize that, 
in public affairs, patience and moderation are also forces, and 
forces which are Ae least deceiving of all.’ 

The drought contained in this passage naturally evokes an 
important observation, which I have the honour to submit in 
a few words for the enlightened criticism of Your Majesty. 

Sire, the_ object of this passage, no doubt, was to ask the 
French nation to bear patiently the unhealthy political system 
which oppresses her and to wait with moderation until the 
complete development of the Charter has fulfilled its promises. 

The merchant who has sent out a ship to trade with India 
does not expect to receive at once the benefits which his undertaking should bring to him. However eager he may be to enjoy 
them, he^ knows that such an expedition needs time and he 
waits patiently until the natural term has been reached. But if 
the vessel, loaded up for a long time, were to remain in harbour 
for months on end, in spite of a favourable -wind or, what, is an 
even more apt analog, if the ship’s officers, after putting out to 
sea, took a course which led in absolutely the opposite direction 
to. India, would it be suitable to exhort the merchant to bear 
this misfortune patiently and to wait placidly until this ill-led 
undertaking had been successful? And, if his whole existence 
was bound up in it, surely such words be not only ridiculous but 
cruelly derisive? 

Nevertheless, it is in this ridiculous light which the absurd 
behaviour of the present government is putting the exhortation 
addressed by Your Majesty to the French nation, in the passage 
which I have just quoted, an exhortation which, by itself is very 
sensible. ^ 

Let the monarchy place itself at the head of the general movement which is pushing society towards the establishment of the 
industrial and scientific system today and then a vast course of 




extensive improvements, clear and assured, many of them 
imminent, will open the eyes of the French nation. The nation 
will distinguish perfectly well for itself those which are immediately practicable from those which only the complete development of this system can bring about. But if the government 
persists in its mad attempts to re-establish the feudal and 
ecclesiastical system, the nation will have the undoubted right 
to show its impatience and even its indignation. In this respect, 
far from the French people having shown any blameworthy 
attitudes. 

I would go so far as to say that they have earned the praise 
and gratitude of the king for the really admirable patience and 
moderation -with which they have borne the annoying consequences of governmental incompetence for six years. The people 
were upheld by the single hope that the royal power would at 
last open its eyes to the incompetence of its advisers. Your 
Majesty, I do not hesitate to say, did not do justice to this wise 
and generous frame of mind in your speech. The French nation 
has been patient, moderate and trusting, to a far greater extent 
than the monarchy had any right to demand, given the conduct 
of the government. But the government will perhaps remember 
that all patience has its limits and will stop before patience is 
exhausted. 

The passage quoted above can perhaps be looked at from a 
second, still more important, point of view. 

Your Majesty appears to be persuaded, according to this 
passage, that patience and moderation are the political forces 
upon which most reliance should be placed. I have no fear in 
stating that this seems to me to be an erroneous opinion because 
these forces are, of their nature, purely passive and, because of 
this, quite inadequate to the present state of things, which 
demands that the most essentially active powers should be called 
into play as much in the king’s interests as in those of the people. 

When a society ceases to be active in one direction, it must 
become active in another; for the first need of any nation, and 
above all of the French nation, is activity. The French 
were highly exalted in the military sense, under Bonaparte s 
domination; today, they must be even more highly exalted in 
the industrial sense! Nothing, indeed, is easier. It is the only way 
to destroy the memories of glory which are still attached to this 
degenerate period, upon which is founded a large part of the 
influence which the faction hostile to your dynasty still exercises 
over many people. 

Prudent and moderate men did much evil during the Revolution, because they allowed ambitious and intransigent men to 
gain an ascendency which they could have prevented by exerting 
themselves as much as the malcontents did. This sad experience fully confirmed the truth, which has already been superabundantly proved both by the knowledge of man and by the 
history of all ages, that to resist with complete efficacy, action 
must be balanced with action. Thus, in public affairs even more 
than in private ones, patience and moderation far from being 
‘the forces which deceive the least’ are, on the contrary the most 
deceiving, because they are normally supposed to be open to 
very great powers of resistance, which they do not have and 
will never have. 

Today, it is certain that the political apathy of the industrialists and of the scientists is precisely the greatest obstacle to the 
establishment of lasting peace, which must be most urgently 
overcome. The result is, in fact, that the direction of national 
opinion is inevitably left to incompetent men, to the ambitious 
and to the intriguers who are still the only people prepared to 
act. The industrialists and the scientists only reserve for themselves the right to criticize the plan which the others have laid 
down. This can clearly have no effect so long as they do not 
themselves take over the leadership of the national cause, and 
make it their own cause. 

Thus, far from Your Majesty being able to count on patience 
and moderation as political powers, Your Majesty should, on 
the contrary, regard the political inaction of the mass of the 
nation as a veritable plague. The most efficacious measure 
which could be adopted in favour of your august dynasty is to 
persuade the scientists and industrialists, by placing yourself at 
their head, to become active in the political sphere, for they 
alone can thwart the plans of the troublemakers. 

Between the downfall of one system and the establishment of 
another, there necessarily intervenes a period, longer or shorter, 
of political inactivity. But to represent this state of transition as 
a permanent one, to imagine that the French nation can rest 
peacefully in political stagnation, is clearly an error, and a very 
serious one. The French nation feels the need to play a leading 
role in Europe, and it is in the industrial and scientific direction 
that she is likely to play it. So long as the political order does not 
conform to this national tendency, society will necessarily be in 
a state of crisis. 

. . . Your Majesty ended your speech by announcing that 
according to your wish, ‘this session will finish the work successfully begun by the last one,’ 




The government has only too accurately fulfilled this part of 
Your Majesty’s promises. 

In the last session, the intention of the government to become 
the Don Quixote of the noblemen and of the clergy was clearly 
shown. The government had arranged for them to have the 
majority in the so-called chamber of commons and they were 
assured, over and above this, of the monopoly of debate which 
is so much a part of the weakness and unpopularity of that 
faction. In the present session, the government issued simply 
preparatory measures; it began to make direct attempts to 
organize the political machine in a feudal and clerical sense. 

It was with this in view that the government had drawn up an 
ordinance on public education whose clear intention was to give 
to the clergy the direction of national education and to propose 
a law on the municipalities with the manifest object of putting 
the noblemen, the public officials, the jurists, the idle landowners, in a word the whole flock of non-producers, at the head 
of the commons of France. It remains for me for an instant to 
draw Your Majesty’s attention to these two great acts of folly. 

Sire, national education is the special function of the spiritual 
power. But it is not by virtue of an ordinance, or a law, or a 
charter of any kind that a class of men can become the spiritual 
power. It is solely through the superiority of their enlightenment. Effectively, this was originally the basis of the power of 
the clergy. But for a long time this superiority has been completely dissipated and passed over entirely to the scientists, who 
alone today have all the real existing knowledge. This is a fact 
that all the ordinances and even all the possible constitutions 
cannot change. Thus, the spiritual power is really in the hands 
of the scientists. This is clearly verified by observation since they 
alone today have the power to command universal credence. A 
reasonable ordinance on this question should have as its object 
only the solemn recognition of this fact, instead of struggling 
against it, and should adopt or rather regularize its inevitable 
consequence by entrusting the supreme direction of national 
education to the scientists. 

Some men whose biased minds are continually occupied m 
combining elements which arc incompatible because they belong to different systems, think that everything could be reconciled by giving to the scientists that part of education relating 
to positive knowledge and leaving the teaching of morals to the 
clergy. It was inevitable that such a state of affairs should exist 
transitionally between the period of the crumbling of the old 
spiritual power and that of the maturity of the new. Indeed, it 





is one of the great characteristics of the profound anarchy in 
which society has found itself between the decadence of the old 
political system and the final constitution of the new. But that 
such a fundamental disorder should be seen as a permanent and 
normal state of society is extraordinary. As a general thesis, it is 
monstrous that the teaching of morals and of the positive subjects should be entrusted to different bodies, for it is monstrous* 
that the ignorant should be in charge of enlightened men. The 
first condition to command belief in precepts is the perception in 
those who receive them of the superiority of the intellect of the 
enlightened men who pronounce them. A second condition, the 
necessity of which is even more obvious, is the established 
morality of the teaching body. But the clergy have long since 
lost any influence in this second respect, as in the first, because 
they have cast off the Christian character in order to assume 
a retrogressive one. 

Sire, national education should be reconstituted today in the 
hands of the scientists according to an entirely new plan. The 
government could cover itself with glory by putting this beautiful and noble undertaking into force, the only one of its kind 
which is not ephemeral. Instead, it has preferred to cover itself 
with ridicule by trying to re-establish, for the advantage of the 
clergy, educational plans which belong to the fourteenth 
century. 


The bill on the municipalities gives rise to essentially similar 
remarks as those above. It can be said that, with this measure, 
the government is putting itself in a false position with reference 
to a great temporal fact, just as it did by the one above, with 
reference to a great spiritual fact, 

_ Fired with superficial zeal, dazzled by ephemeral power — 
indeed never having measured the true strength of power, never 
having risen to the idea that this strength is durable only when 
It is linked with the internal order of society, which, in turn, 
results from the state of civilization — the government imagined 
that all it had to do \vas to decree by an ordinance that such a 
class of men would be the notables of the nation, for this to be 
true in fact. Thenceforward, starting from this principle, in itself 
a just one, that the municipal administration shall be entrusted 
to the notables, it conceived the idea of putting it into the hands 

of the gentlemen, the public officials, the jurists and the idle 
landowners, by proclaiming them, by its own authority, the 
notables of the French nation. The government has substituted 
this  expression of its feeble will for the reality of observed 
facts. 

If such an extravagant project could be realized for a time, 
the municipal administration which, by its nature, should be 
the most popular of all, would find itself given over to men who 
exert over the people no real and permanent influence and who 
have no way of winning their confidence. This administration 
would be far worse organized than it has been since the enfranchisement of the communes, six hundred years ago. 
Fortunately the monstrous consequences will open the eyes of 
royalty to the absurdity of the line adopted by the government. 

Sire, in a nation composed of twenty-nine and a half million 
producers against five hundred thousand non-producers, it is 
easy to decide from which of these two categories the municipal 
administrations should be chosen, because it is easy to determine 
where arc the true notables. The gentlemen, the public officials, 
tire jurists and the idle landowners, in spite of all the importance 
which they believe they have and which is conventionally given 
to them, arc not notables in any way, no matter how they may be 
considered today. These classes do not possess any of the true 
social superiority, not that of physical strength nor even that of 
wealth, nor that of intelligence, nor of enlightenment. They 
have no influence upon the people who see them, with natural 
intuition, as a swarm of drones united against the bees. In what 
respect would they then be notables? The only notables today in 
France, with the exception of the scientists and the artists, are 
the leaders’ of agriculture, of manufacturing and commerce. It 
is in them that the power is exclusively to be found to influence 
the people, because it is to them that the people are accustomed 
to defer in their daily relationships. 

The immediate result of this indisputable fact is the need to 
choose the municipal administration from among those latter 
classes. The nature of things does not allow, in this respect, any 
freedom of choice because it sets very precisely the condition 
which it must satisfy if it is not to be null and void. This clear 
condition is what an administration, which is essentially designed to weigh upon the people in a direct way, should be 
entrusted to 




To act otherwise is to set the political order in opposition to the 
social or civil order, a state of affairs which cannot be maintained 
for any length of time. The whole argument then can only bear 
upon the question of knowing which men have most influence 
upon the people. Reduced to these terms, the solution is self evident, unless of course one introduces shadowy metaphysics 
into a study which reduces itself naturally to the simple 
observation of a fact. 

It remains for me. Sire, to present briefly to Your Majesty 
the conclusion of the different considerations examined in this 
address. 

The general plan of policy adopted by the government and 
even by the cabinets of all the kings of Europe, united to follow 
it together, is radically absurd from all points of view, because it 
leads the governments in a direction which is contrary' to that 
of European civilization. 

This plan is even more harmful to the interests of your august 
dynasty, whose fate it immediately threatens, than it is to the 
interests of the French nation whose cause is in itself robust 
enough to face all the consequences of ministerial incompetence, 
however harmful they may be. 

It feeds continually the influence of the faction led by the 
nobility created by Bonaparte, whose ascendancy over national 
opinion increases day by day, following a deplorable course 
linked to the extent to which government makes new efforts 
in favour of the gentlemen and of the clergy. 

Lastly (and this aspect of it alone would be enough by which 
to judge such a senseless plan) it is even contrary to the true 
interests of the handful of rebels for whom it is devised, and for 
whom the wisest plan would be to withdraw into their natural 
incompetence. In allowing them to indulge their feeble fury in 
pursuing their fantastic projects, the government is involuntarily preparing for them the sort of future that can be expected 
by a foolish insect which has dared to irritate a lion. 

the fundamental defect of this plan is that it offers to royalty, 
as a support, declining classes who no longer have any real 
strength who lend to the royal power all their fictitious power 
and who, in consequence, instead of being its support are, on 
the contrary, a liability; a liability which is difficult to bear, 
given the unpopularity of these classes, or rather the extreme 
aversion they inspire in the body of the nation. The result is, 
necessarily, as a general consequence, that this plan, far from 
bringing to an end the profound social crisis into which society 
has fallen, tends to prolong it and to aggravate it more and 




more to increase its anarchic character, by separating the 
people and the kings more and more the one from the other. 

The only line of conduct which could end this crisis, the only 
one -which is in accord with the true interests of kings as well as 
peoples, consists in having royalty backed by the immediate 
political action of the social forces who have become all powerful today; in a word, to place royalty at the head of the 
irresistible movement which is impelling the existing society towards the system of organization which will establish a new 
spiritual power in the hands of the scientists and a new temporal 
one in the hands of the heads of industrial enterprises. 

Civilized mankind has always inclined towards this system 
since its infancy, but especially since the enfranchisement of the 
communes and the introduction of the positive sciences into 
Europe by the Arabs. Starting from this memorable period, to 
which should be attributed the direct origin of the industrial and 
scientific system, the internal order of society has been established upon that basis by imperceptible degrees. This civil or 
elementary organization is today fully effected in the most 
civilized countries, and especially in France. The moment has 
at last arrived to work directly for the constitution, political or 
general, of the new system. Prudence advises kings to put themselves at the head of this enterprise so that it will not operate 
■without and in spite of them. 

It has needed, I am not ashamed to say, lengthy meditations 
over a long period on the advance of civilization to reach this 
general view which links and dominates all the facts. But, once 
it has been found, it needs only common sense to recognize the 
truth, so much does it correspond to the real state of affairs. The 
judgement to be made reduces itself, as it were, to a simple 
question of statistics. 

A glance at the statistical table of France shows, in fact with 
perfect clarity, that the masses of men organized among themselves in the industrial and scientific system possess to a high 
degree all the real superiority over their adversaries; superiority 
in numbers, in physical strength, in wealth, in administrative 
capacity, in morality and finally in the one thing which is so 
decisive: in intelligence and acquired positive knowledge. Such 
a striking result shows how absurd it is that the immense 
majority should be held back in its progress by the other classes 
of the population, how contrary it is to the nature of things that 
this weak and parasitical residue should any longer keep the 
leadership of a society with which it has nothing in common. 

Sire, the general conclusion of this address is that Your 




Majesty should take upon yourself the character of the founding 
king of the industrial and scientific system, and put in force as 
quickly as possible the theoretical and practical work necessary 
for the development of the political constitution of this system, 
by regarding the Charter as a provisional control, destined 
solely to govern the society for the time this transition will take, 
as I think I proved in the part of this address relating to the 
Charter.
